>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Let's get to
one of my favorite topics, exceptions.
So this is a quote that
I use all the time.
A large fraction of the flaws in software
development are due to programmers not
fully understanding their states, all
possible states their code may execute in.
So exceptions are errors that are thrown
by the runtime and they can be thrown for
any number of reasons.
They can be thrown by your own code,
they can be thrown by code
written by Microsoft,
they could be they could be thrown as
part of the code inside of a framework.
So exceptions are really an important part
of development, especially in C Sharp,
and understanding what they are and
how to predict them and
how to handle them is really important.
So the thing that we do to control them,
we're gonna introduce a different
control flow type, which is,
I'm gonna delete this, close that, and
I am going to write out
what's called a try-catch.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So, let's
break down what this statement is doing.
So, the try-catch, the try is basically,
I am executing code that I
think may throw an exception.
The catch is where the code
that will actually
execute if an exception is caught.
So let me demonstrate that.
So I mentioned the DateTime.Parse
method earlier.
So if we give it just a random string.
What's gonna happen?
It's probably gonna throw an exception,
right?
And I can see that actually,
if you go here, you can hover over it,
it will tell you the kinds of
exceptions that it will throw.
It will tell you if the argument is null,
it will throw the argument null exception.
So if you give it a null string.
Or if you've given an invalid string,
a format exception will be thrown.
So we can see that here.
I will console.writeline
something went wrong.
Boom, and then we will Ctrl
+ Shift + Tilde dotnet run.
And then we see that something went wrong.
It's because at this point,
we got an exception.
And let me show you kinda
what that looks like.
I'm gonna run this with the debugger,
which I haven't done yet.
So I've put what's down,
what's called a break point.
And essentially, I wanna say that if
this line is going to be executed,
then I want you to stop there.
But it has to be run in debug mode, and
debug mode has a performance
penalty associated with it.
It takes a lot of resources to run debug,
comparatively speaking.
So you can see that we've
actually stopped at this point.
We've hit the break point.
We caught the exception and you can see
that, if we hover over the exception,
which is something that I do frequently,
this is something that I love
using my tooling for, right?
You can see that the type
of exception that's thrown.
You can get some more
information about it.
I really wanted to just do this to
demonstrate that once an error hits here,
it will fall down to here and and
do what's called catch the exception.
So now we could do something with it.
We can recover gracefully.
We could ask the user to
input something else, right?
There's a lot of things we can do.
It really depends on
what we're looking for.
Now, the base class,
all exceptions are of this base class,
which is system.exception, and
there are no exceptions to that rule.
All things, all errors that are thrown
are exception are of the exception class.
They're of the exception type.
But you can, if you want to,
catch multiple types of exceptions, and
you can also catch more derived types,
as we call them.
So let's say we wanted to catch
the ArgumentNullException, right?
Because that's one of the two
exceptions that gets handled here.
So let's watch what
happens when we do that.
We have a breakpoint.
We're running it in debug mode.
And instead of going down here,
we didn't have the exception be caught.
So the CLR in our debugger rightfully
told us, hey, at this line of code,
this exception was thrown.
So what do you wanna do?
So I'm just gonna keep going and
it's just gonna crash the program.
And that's because I've I've
chosen to only catch
an ArgumentNullException
here at this line.
But if I copy paste this, I can actually
catch multiple kinds of exceptions.
As you can see, the compiler tells me
that I'm already catching this, so
I don't need to do anything with it,
or I can't do anything with it.
This code won't compile.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: But
I can catch this exception here now.
And if I put my break point here and
I put my break point here,
I'll debug the project.
And you can see that it skips over because
the exception that's thrown is very
clearly a FormatException,
not an ArgumentNullException.
So, that is exception handling.
So we'll see some more of that
as we get into the course, yes?
>> Speaker 1: Do you typically log
these exceptions in a file, or
do you use a service?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: That's
a good question.
It depends on the medium in
which the program is executing.
So for example, in a cloud system, I'm
almost certainly gonna be using logging
into something like
Application Insights or Datadog.
Or some other program that
allows me to see it like and
I can log into a web interface and then
get a readout of what happened to that
exception with a lot of other telemetry.
If it's a console app that
I wrote because once a day,
we need to process a CSV
file that came in from FTP.
I'm probably just gonna log it to
a file and then maybe send an email or
something along those lines to
say that there's an error or
there was a problem
processing this this record.
Good question.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: One other, so
we talked about catching
multiple types of exceptions.
There's one other part of the try-catch
block that you should know,
which is the finally block.
So the finally block always
executes no matter what.
So as long as you've caught the error and
you haven't rethread it, or sorry,
even if you have to rethrown it.
Finally will always execute.
So let's take a look at that.
So we know that this method is gonna
throw, so I'm gonna hit Play and
we're gonna see something went wrong and
then it printed finally
because this will always run.
The only time that doesn't run is if
in the middle of handling an exception,
the computer gets unplugged.
That's the only time.
Let's see maybe a solar flare,
too, I don't know.
So a couple more notes.
You can filter down even further,
not just by type, but you can also say
when an error message contains
a specific line of or string, or maybe
the exception has an additional property
on it, maybe it has an error code.
An error code equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and
you wanna handle that specific condition.
You can do that.
I do not write these a ton, but I do write
them, especially when we're talking about,
I'm catching an exception from
a database operation that failed and
it has this very specific
message that it sends back.
So, useful to know, not necessarily,
but for most cases,
you're probably just gonna
catch an exception without
doing any other kind of wind condition.
And then lastly, you are able to create
your own exceptions this syntax will make
a lot more sense after we
talk about classes and
you're able to throw your own exception.
So let's say for instance that I have
a variable string name = Alice and
I don't like Alice and
actually if name doesn't equal Spencer,
maybe there's some narcissism,
I don't know.
We'll throw an a new
InvalidOperationException.
So new is how you create a new
instance of an exception.
We'll get into the new syntax
when we get into classes.
But the important thing that you
need to know is that you are able
to throw your own exceptions.
And I don't think programmers
do enough of this.
The main reason that you would do that is
if you had a method that you declared,
something like public static
void DoSomeProcessing,
and you had some critical value here.
And that critical value needs
to be a non-nullable string.
So if you say, if string is null or
whitespace critical value,
you would throw a new ArgumentException.
And give it a message that's helpful.
That's typically when you would
throw your own exceptions.
Very useful, very, very important,
very important part of the framework.
So I think that the bottom line for
exceptions is that you should expect them.
If I could credit a couple of things in my
career, it's knowing SQL really well and
knowing when exceptions are thrown and
what states those things will happen.
That has been a huge part
of just making sure that if
an exception is thrown, expecting it, and
then being able to handle and
self-recover from it.
When we get into null references,
you saw that null reference
exception earlier is probably the most
common and frustrating exception for
new dotnet developers and
even dotnet developers in their career.
Debugging them can be a pain,
but they're important.
So we'll get to that in a little bit,
any questions?
>> Speaker 1: Why use finally if you
could just write a statement after
the try-catch?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So you might
wanna use finally if you absolutely want
this code to execute.
And the reason you might do that is you
may choose to rethrow the exception here.
So there are reasons to do that.
You might catch this here and
then log it to somewhere and
then rethrow the exception so that way
the processing for the client stops.
Maybe there's some kind of
business critical process we
don't want to run because the system
is in an invalid state, but
we still have some code down
here that we need to run.
That's when you would use the finally
block as opposed to just writing
it straight after.
Really good question.
By the way, the key word to
rethrow an exception is throw.
If you do this outside of the context of a
catch statement, it's gonna error out and
say you're not allowed to do this,
because you're not throwing an exception.
By the way,
this is a thing that you can do.
You can rethrow the exception like this.
Do not do that.
Well, .NET will complain,
it's a rethrow and
caught exception changes
stack information.
So you really don't wanna
throw ex like this.
You'll lose precious
debugging information.
So always write your keyword as throw.
That is something that sometimes new
developers get caught up on, but
I don't see it most of the time.
Just throw keyword by itself
will rethrow the exception.
So that way it does what we call,
bubbling up to the caller.
And we can see that here,
if we we've run the project,
you can see that we'll print
the unhandled exception to here.
Yeah, perfect.
>> Speaker 2: Can you print x?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yeah,
absolutely.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Absolutely,
so if you wanted to just print it or
log it to someplace,
you could do that here.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Awesome.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Cool,
actually I'm sorry, yeah,
that actually didn't rethrow there,
let me try that again.
We need to throw a ArgumentNullException,
my bad, there we go.
Okay, yes you can absolutely
write it to the console for sure.